Data Model
==========

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Overview
--------

The GisFIRE project needs a way to describe the entities involved in wildfire analysis —
lightning strikes, meteorological data, thunderstorms, wildfire ignitions — and to store
them in a spatial database. This is the **data model**.

The model is built on the general characteristics of each entity and the specifics of
the different data providers, so an object-oriented approach is used: generic domain
models with provider-specific subclasses.

What is a Data Model?
---------------------

A data model describes:

- The entities in the system (for example ``Lightning``, ``WeatherStation``,
  ``Thunderstorm``).
- The relationships between these entities.
- The properties and data types of each entity.
- Any constraints or business rules.

Here it is implemented in code with an ORM,
`SQLAlchemy <https://www.sqlalchemy.org>`_, and its spatial companion
`GeoAlchemy2 <https://geoalchemy-2.readthedocs.io>`_ on top of PostgreSQL/PostGIS.

Building blocks
---------------

Declarative base
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Every ORM model inherits from a single :class:`~src.data_model.Base`, a plain
SQLAlchemy 2.0 :class:`~sqlalchemy.orm.DeclarativeBase` subclass (typed
:class:`~sqlalchemy.orm.Mapped` / :func:`~sqlalchemy.orm.mapped_column` columns).
Importing a model module registers its table on
:attr:`Base.metadata <sqlalchemy.orm.DeclarativeBase.metadata>`, from which the
schema is created directly
(:meth:`Base.metadata.create_all() <sqlalchemy.schema.MetaData.create_all>`) — there
are no hand-written SQL DDL files to keep in sync.

Primary keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Models declare their primary key as a bare
``id: Mapped[int] = mapped_column(primary_key=True)``, with no ``autoincrement``
argument. The column *is* autoincrementing all the same: SQLAlchemy defaults to
``autoincrement="auto"``, which applies to any single-column integer primary key that
has no other default, so on PostgreSQL the DDL comes out as ``id SERIAL NOT NULL``.
Passing ``autoincrement=True`` explicitly would change nothing. This is why models can
be inserted without ever setting ``id`` — the database assigns it and SQLAlchemy reads
it back through ``INSERT ... RETURNING``.

.. note::

   ``SERIAL`` is PostgreSQL's legacy mechanism. Since PostgreSQL 10 the standard
   equivalent is an identity column, written in SQLAlchemy as
   ``mapped_column(Identity(), primary_key=True)`` and emitted as
   ``id INTEGER GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY NOT NULL``. It behaves identically
   from the ORM's point of view, but the sequence is properly owned by the column (it
   is dropped with the table and needs no separate ``GRANT``), and an explicit
   ``INSERT`` of an ``id`` cannot silently desynchronise the sequence the way it can
   with ``SERIAL``. The project has not switched; if it ever does, the change is
   confined to the ``mapped_column`` calls and requires no test changes.

Providers and products
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A :class:`~src.data_model.data_provider.DataProvider` row does not stand for an
organisation but for one **data product** of that organisation. GWIS, for example,
publishes both the Global Wildfire Database and the Fine Fuel Moisture Code (FFMC);
tying ingested data to plain ``"GWIS"`` would be too coarse to tell the two apart.
Every row therefore carries a ``product`` alongside its ``name``, and it is the
``(name, product)`` pair that is unique — not ``name`` on its own.

The product is a plain string column rather than a separate table. The set of products
is small, they carry no attributes of their own, and a lookup table would add a join
and a second insert for no gain.

Generic and provider-specific models
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Generic domain models (:class:`~src.data_model.data_provider.DataProvider`,
:class:`~src.data_model.wildfire.Wildfire`, ``Lightning``, ``Thunderstorm``,
``WeatherStation``, ``Variable``, ...) use polymorphic inheritance; provider-specific
subclasses add the columns particular to each data source. They live under
``src/providers/`` and use joined table inheritance — see :doc:`providers`.

Geographic reference data
-------------------------

``src/data_model/geography/`` holds a different kind of model. It is not an observation
of anything but a description of the world the observations sit in: administrative
divisions, used to clip a dataset to an area of interest or to attribute a wildfire to a
country. It is imported once from an authoritative source and changes only when that
source republishes, which is why it is kept apart from the wildfire domain proper.

Nesting
^^^^^^^

Administrative divisions nest — Spain contains Catalonia, which contains Girona, which
contains Osor — and how deep the nesting goes differs from country to country. The
hierarchy is therefore an **adjacency list**: each
:class:`~src.data_model.geography.admin_boundary.AdminBoundary` carries a ``parent_id``
pointing back at the same table, plus a ``level`` giving its depth. Nothing in the model
fixes a number of levels, so a country with five tiers and one with two are stored the
same way.

Walking one step of the hierarchy is the ``parent`` / ``children`` relationship. Walking
a whole branch, whose depth is not known in advance, is a recursive CTE:

.. code-block:: python

   descendants = (
       select(AdminBoundary.id, AdminBoundary.name)
       .where(AdminBoundary.id == spain.id)
       .cte(recursive=True)
   )
   descendants = descendants.union_all(
       select(AdminBoundary.id, AdminBoundary.name)
       .join(descendants, AdminBoundary.parent_id == descendants.c.id)
   )

``level`` is a normalised depth, not the source's own level number
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``level`` counts from ``0`` at the country and adds one per subdivision — Spain 0,
Catalonia 1, Girona 2, Osor 3. It is deliberately **not** whatever level number the
provider uses.

OpenStreetMap is the reason. Its ``admin_level`` tag is neither contiguous nor
comparable between countries: Spain tags autonomous communities 4 and provinces 6,
France tags departments 6 and arrondissements 7. A query for ``admin_level = 6`` would
mean provinces in one country and departments in another. Sources that have a level
number of their own keep it as a column on their subclass, and the importer is what maps
it onto ``level``.

Spatial lookups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Finding which boundary contains a point or a perimeter is a **spatial join**, not a
foreign key, written with the PostGIS predicates GeoAlchemy2 exposes:

.. code-block:: python

   select(AdminBoundary.name).where(
       func.ST_Contains(AdminBoundary.geometry, point), AdminBoundary.level == 0
   )

The ``geometry`` column gets a GiST index automatically — GeoAlchemy2 creates one for
every :class:`~geoalchemy2.types.Geometry` column unless told not to — and
``ST_Contains`` uses it, as a bounding-box prefilter followed by an exact recheck.

.. warning::

   Do not repeat this join on every query. Country polygons have tens of thousands of
   vertices, so the exact recheck is expensive, and for a country as sprawling as Russia
   the bounding box prefilters almost nothing. Resolve the boundary **once, at import
   time**, and store the resulting id on the event.

   Should repeated on-the-fly containment ever be genuinely necessary, the standard
   remedy is a companion table of ``ST_Subdivide``-d pieces of the boundaries, small
   enough that the bounding-box prefilter does real work. That is not built, and should
   not be until something needs it.

API reference
-------------

Each model lives in its own module under ``src/data_model/`` and has its own reference
page, generated from the source with autodoc. New models get a page added to the list
below as they are ported.

:doc:`data_model/base`
    The declarative base class every ORM model inherits from. It collects the table
    definitions so the database schema can be created from the models.

:doc:`data_model/data_provider`
    A source of data ingested by GisFIRE (a weather service, a lightning-detection
    network, ...), narrowed down to one of its data products. Provider-specific data
    tables reference it, so data can only be attached to a known provider.

:doc:`data_model/wildfire`
    A wildfire event — when it started, when it was extinguished and the burnt area, kept
    as a PostGIS ``MULTIPOLYGON`` in EPSG:4326.

:doc:`data_model/geography_admin_boundary`
    An administrative division — a country, a region, a province, a municipality — as a
    PostGIS ``MULTIPOLYGON`` in EPSG:4326, nested under the division above it.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :hidden:

   data_model/base
   data_model/data_provider
   data_model/wildfire
   data_model/geography_admin_boundary
